Uh look, I, I was, I was
going to ask you because uh I think that in
one of our conversations, we talked a little bit
about this. But uh I was uh I was
curious, I got curious the other day, um
when you're, when you're in the process in the
initial steps of creating a story, uh o of
course, I don't want you to just leave on
the table all your cards, all of the things
that you use as a, as a writer.
I'm an open book but I'll talk about anything.
But uh uh uh how do you go about it
exactly. I mean, because of course, I
imagine that different writers, different artists have different methods
, different processes. They go through different creative ways
of uh building up their stories. But uh how
do you do it exactly? I mean, uh
perhaps not so much how you do it but uh
how much of it do you plan ahead? So
you, uh for example, you have an idea
for a story before you start writing. Do you
already have a detailed plan about uh the characters that
you will have their, their personalities, their names
the places where the story will take place, the
ending or how do you go about it? I
used to not, first of all, what you're
talking about is there are two kinds of writers,
they say plotters and panthers, plotters plot, right
? And panthers fly by the seat of their pants
. I used to be a panther and because I
, I felt like, I don't know, II
, I like that feeling of kind of winging it
and seeing where the story took me. And then
I, um I wrote an outline for one of
my novels and by outline, I didn't kind of
, I didn't really write a classical outline. In
fact, I didn't even start out trying to write
an outline. I was just trying to think through
, I knew I wanted to tell a certain story
and I was trying to think through how I would
get from one part of the story to the next
. And so what I began doing was um writing
a chapter, giving the chapter a name. I
didn't always give the chapter a name first. Sometimes
I, I wrote a short summary of it first
. I would just write a short summary, basically
what I wanted to happen in that chapter. And
so that's how I've settled on writing an outline that
to, to put it more into a narrative,
you know, to put my outline into a,
into prose, you know, into a, into
an actual functioning narrative works better for me than writing
the, the sort of classical outline of, you
know, the chapter one a is going to happen
, the protagonist meets the heroine, they go on
a motorcycle ride, you know, that, that
doesn't work for me. It doesn't, it doesn't
inspire me sufficiently to wanna write to that direct,
you know, to that chapter. So, you
know, sometimes if I write a relatively short summary
, that's maybe just a paragraph. Other times,
I even, you know, if I feel moved
, I'll write an entire scene from that, you
know, as it kind of comes to me,
not perfect obviously, but just maybe a few lines
of dialogue, whatever it is. And that has
been really helpful to me. So now I think
I'm an official plotter because I, um not only
does that expedite the process tremendously, it, it
just makes it so much easier to write. It
also keeps somebody like me who is prone to creative
tangents. It keeps me on the straight and narrow
and not, you know, taking the reader to
a place they don't need to go and they don't
even really want to go, which is, you
know, kind of important. You, you have
to keep your readers uh needs in mind. You
know, I think as a writer, I think
that's important, not just your own needs. It's
, it's, it's a conversation you're having in a
sense with someone who is picking up your work and
, and, and and you have to remember that
it's not one sided. Yeah. You know,
I, I was curious about asking you about that
. O of course, again, you're just one
single creator. There are many different ways of doing
the same thing. I bet. So, but
I, I was just thinking so for example,
we've already talked here on the show about, for
example, uh a game of Thrones, I mentioned
a few times one piece and I mean, I
was just uh and the Lord of the Rings also
, for example, uh I was just thinking about
uh when writers try to go about creating those massive
stories that go for more than 1000 chapters in manga
or several different uh 1000 pages volumes uh book volumes
. I was just thinking, how much ahead do
they plan their story? Because sometimes the story flows
so well that one as a reader would think.
Oh OK. So this guy before he started his
story, he might have had uh II I don't
know 1000 pages of detailed plot, plot lines or
scenes that he would go through and he must have
had everything planned from the start. But then you
get to, I don't know the latest or what
will be the latest book by George RR Martin the
Winds of winter. And he's been trying to write
it since 2011 and he's just like stuck beca and
, and then, and then when that something like
that happens when the writer goes for 12 years without
being able to, to finish the sixth book in
the install the sixth installment in the series. You're
like, oh, ok. So wait a minute
, let's track back a little bit because this guy
hasn't planned that far ahead because now he doesn't know
what to do with so many plot lines and with
so many different things happening at the same time in
the story. And then, you know, then
sometimes readers read too much into something that came previously
in the story and, and then they expect it
to come back and a plot line and, and
it was never intended to be that. Yeah.
And, and, and sometimes it's just, oh
my God, these, these here two books ago
was foreshadowing or, and it's not foreshadowing at all
. It was just that they coincidentally uh brought to
the story, something that if you look back,
it, it seems that 200 chapters ago there was
foreshadowing for that, but it was not for shadowing
at all. I'll tell you when I look at
someone like George RR Martin, I'm sure that Game
of Thrones, the TV series was both a blessing
and a curse because something like that, it,
it really does interrupt your story process and you don't
, you don't want it to kind of absorb into
your vision for the story. But it does,
I think that um the same is probably true uh
for, for people who, um, for kind
of established people with an established voice in their writing
if they attempt to use a I for something more
than say an outline, um, because it's,
it, it, it begins to conflict with your
own ideas, but it gives you ideas at the
same time, but then you kind of lose sight
of where you are. And I think that,
that probably, I can't imagine that didn't have an
effect on him to watch them in my, you
know, in our opinion, badly finish up his
series, right? And now there are all these
expectations and he's probably got to do, you know
, the double work of, for one of,
I'm sure his work was interrupted by the series because
he had to attend to that. But then to
extract himself from the conclusions that the series writers made
and also allow there to be perhaps time enough for
fans of the television series to get unvested in the
way that the series writers um develop the characters and
end of the story so that they can invest in
what Martin is writing. Um That II, I
mean, I can imagine that's a huge challenge.
I mean, II, I know a lot of
people are so mad at him for not having come
out with um with this latest uh you know,
installment of Game of Thrones, but I completely understand
it and I, I think he's probably doing the
right thing, taking his time about it because unless
he was just so in the zone and could finish
it, despite the fact that he had this Blockbuster
series going on, which, I mean, unless
you're a hermit of a writer, how can you
not be affected by that? Um, I think
probably the more time he gives it the more,
um, hopefully, you know, readers will be
willing to reinvest in his, uh, in his
vision for the story. I suspect he's gonna end
it quite differently than the way it ended, don't
you? I hope so. I really do.
I mean, I, I really don't see it
going any other way. Um, because I mean
, the way they ended, it was just so
mind bogglingly television for God's sake, you know,
I mean, it was just so it was so
amateur AAA and you know what I like is,
uh, when sometimes writers are really honest about how
they do things and how things work because I've watched
a few months ago an interview with George Rrrr Martin
and, uh, uh, the interviewers were asking
him. Oh, so you've, uh, did
you, have you seen that, um, that
theory, uh, uh that was made by fans
that's, uh, going around, uh, in
the, on the internet about this or that,
or is something that happened in the book? The
, uh does it have this or that meaning?
And he was like, and he was like,
look, you can do with my story, whatever
you want, it doesn't bother me. But people
are sometimes read too much into your own work.
It's not that complex. The only thing I have
in mind there was this simple thing. It's not
like connecting 1000 different points in the story. It's
nothing like that. It was as simple as this
. And so, and he also says that there
are things for example, but his characters, for
example, the color of someone's eyes or particular aspects
of their personality or particular things that he mentions in
the main story, but are, are not part
of the main story. I mean, some of
the background story to a Game of Thrones, for
example, that he actually has to go and ask
other experts on his own books because he doesn't remember
anymore. Ricardo. It's so true because I mean
, I, you know, I, I write
in usually in series form, at least like a
loose series of, of, of, you know
, books, there might be a series of books
that are in the same universe and my kids are
always kind of laughing at me because they'll see me
like rereading my own books and they're like, why
are you reading your own book? You know,
like, because I don't remember what I wrote and
I have to make sure that I have continuity.
So I'm sitting there reading my own books, you
know, taking notes going, oh my God,
I completely forgot that I wrote that you know,
because you, do, you forget it the way
you forget things in your own life and, you
know, a friend might be like, don't you
remember when we did Xy and Z and you're like
, no, I don't remember that at all.
When did that happen? You know, and,
and you know, to them, it was obviously
kind of an, in a fairly important experience,
at least enough for them to remember what happened and
you're looking at them like, II, I got
nothing, you know what I mean? But,
but, but it is, it's incredibly detailed work
writing a series and, you know, unless the
series is, is very simple, you know,
and, and, but um ok, there's just
a lot going on, you're writing somebody's life and
sometimes the lives of multiple characters and it can,
it can, you can easily misremember what happened in
your own story the same way you can, you
can, uh you know, have a false memory
about something in your own life and um interpret a
whole series of events differently because you remember it differently
than other people who are experiencing it. Yeah.
But, but that's the thing because we, because
there are people who are able to create such good
stories. We sort of tend to idolize them and
think of them as being people who died with,
I don't know, 200 IQ and perfect memories and
a big planners and they, they, and,
and like they are the, the, your book
in their head from the very beginning. But actually
, uh, uh, uh, I, I
mean, I've never wrote a book but I would
imagine that perhaps most of the time you're actually rereading
and rewriting, for sure. I'm doing something right
now that I've never done before. Um, I'm
writing a Cold War Detective. No, our series
, but I'm gonna finish the first. Uh,
well, I'm gonna call it a season. It
may never have more than one season, but I'm
kind of using television language for this because it,
it, it seems appropriate for the way I'm structuring
it. I, I want to finish the entire
first season which will be several books, not like
super thick books, like my breath series is thick
. It's, you know, it's historical fantasy.
So they're like, you know, 450 pages,
whatever. Each, these are barely not, you
know, they're, they're novels but they're Detective Noir
. And so they're more in the style, you
know, well, obviously more in the style of
, but also, you know, it's more of
what you would expect from. Um, you know
, Dashiell Hammett and other noir writers. Um,
but I, what I'm gonna be interested to find
out is if I prefer writing the books, one
at a time being able to sit on them for
a while, think about it, then write the
next book or to essentially write it like, you
know, one big story, one big book um
, but all at once, basically, you know
what I mean? All at once, write all
these books at once. And, um, you
know, my intention is, you know, I'm
, I'm doing a little experiment here. My intention
is to, uh release them quickly and sequentially because
I'd like to see how that works. You know
, I'd like to see if, um, if
, uh, it becomes more, you know,
if, if it becomes in inspiring motivating for a
reader to just, you know, go through the
entire series at once this way with you kind of
in real time as they're being, um as they're
being introduced and launched. I'm, I'm rereading this
, this book right now and I'm really just at
the very beginning, but I'm, I'm, I'm
enjoying the experience a lot. It's called The Artist's
Way by Julia Cameron. I mean, it's like
30 years old. She was an ex-wife of Martin
Scorsese and she's, she's kind of made, she's
a writer too, but she also made a second
career basically out of um unlocking people's creativity. Yeah
, kind of this, this sort of motivational style
teacher. But um it, and, but somehow
this was a book I never ended up reading,
like, I, I love books, like Writing
Down The Bones by um Natalie Goldberg. But um
I, I'd never read the Artist's Way. And
even though it's, it's probably the most, um
it, it, it's the kind of book that
I would most relate to because it does kind of
take this, this spiritual approach to creativity and,
and, and, um that's something that's, you
know, very much part of my personality makeup.
But it, it kind of takes you through the
process of sitting with a story and, and being
in a place where you can eavesdrop on the characters
, which, uh you know, a lot of
it's that it's easy to get out of that place
and to put a lot of pressure on yourself and
be like, oh my God. Now I've got
to write this and I think that when you stop
eavesdropping on your characters, you start putting, um
, kind of undue, focus on maybe the setting
and you can write, you know, three pages
of expo exposition, just sort of describing where people
are and you don't need three pages of that.
You know, it's, it's usually not always.
But, um, you know, you can really
become tiresome for a reader if you're not, um
, in the zone, if that makes sense,
you know, if you're not in a, in
a place where you're able to listen. Yeah.
And I think being in that place where you're able
to listen makes it, um, will make,
it, makes it a lot more likely that,
uh, you're also listening to the needs of the
reader, not just to your own needs. Mhm
. But anyway, so I, I'm, I've
started on this and I'm trying to get up earlier
in the morning. And read it before I start
work rather than reading at night, which is my
usual, um, mo, uh, because I
just get so tired at night that I really can't
make it past a couple of pages anyway and I
just fall right, right asleep. Um, but
it's interesting and it's, it's also, I started
reading it because I, um, I, I've
started book coaching someone, a friend of mine who's
wanted to write, uh who's a very good writer
and a creative person, but who has never written
a novel and has, and wants to write a
series, which the idea for her series is just
terrific. So I'm really excited about it. It's
been a lot of fun coaching her and, you
know, I've kind of book, coached people in
piecemeal throughout the years, but it's something that I've
never really wanted to commit to, um for one
because I have three kids at home and you really
, you can only do so much. But it's
, it's, you know, it, it sort
of came at the right time because I'm trying to
write this series, you know, which is very
different from, it's very different from the way I
usually write. And so I'm, it, it's
also forcing me to take my own advice and to
follow that. Um So that's that, I don't
know where else to go with that. But,
um, oh, ok. So le let me
put, let me put a pin on that book
coaching thing because I want to get back to that
. I don't know if to, if today or
next time. Let's see, because I, because
I have a particular uh interesting, let's say thought
experiment to ask you about that thought experiments. We
always talk about thought experiments when we get together.
It's great. Yeah. But, but le let
me ask you this, uh are there times where
you get a little bit frustrated about what you think
are perhaps some of the limitations of your medium?
There is limitations of being a writer instead of being
, for example, uh Mange or someone who creates
uh comics or uh a film director. Just because
for example, in those particular cases, they have
visual aid to the story, right? I mean
, are, are there times where you, where
you think? Oh my God, if I was
doing a movie instead of a book or if I
was doing a comic instead of a book, this
would be so much easier to portray or I,
I mean, I'm not trying to ask you here
, of course, but I'm not, I'm not
trying to imply that that uh a book is better
or worse than cinema or comics or whatever. It's
just that perhaps you think that there are particular things
, particular aspects that you think that perhaps are better
than or portrayed in mediums where you have a visual
aspect to them. For example, I, I
think that is, yes, I mean, the
, the short answer is yes, I, you
know, I, you can almost see that at
play in any medium. You can see where uh
on occasion, at least where um the creator had
to invent a device. Maybe it's a narrator,
you know, who, who in a film,
you know, who kind of talks over what's going
on. Um Because they, they simply weren't able
to adequately tell the story without that. And for
sure, there are times because I'm a really visual
person. I love film, you know, II
, I enjoy film as much as I enjoy reading
a really juicy novel. Um So there are many
times when I'm writing something and I really have to
stop and think because I'm trying to um explain something
that's very visual and yet I don't want to do
it in a way that bores or exhaust the reader
. And I'm, you know, I'm sure that
that's the case and for someone, you know,
creating manga or, um you know, comic books
, comic books, you know, it's not like
in most cases, you can have someone do a
monologue that's this long, you know, I mean
, you have to have a very crisp, it's
kind of like tweeting, you know. Well,
well, actually, actually it's nice but, but
actually it's also interesting because there are many different kinds
of styles for comic books and manga because there are
um some creators that let's put it this way,
they are very verbose. So sometimes you get almost
walls of text and you are like, oh come
on, it's, you know, to me,
then you lose the visual and the whole point is
the visual. It's the play between the words in
the bubble, right? But some of those creators
are actually very good and sometimes that sort of wall
of text is needed or warranted. But, but
, but there are others and again, I'm not
saying that one way is better than the other.
It's uh whatever you prefer. But there are others
that they almost do not have any text at all
. It's the, they are so good with uh
telling you a story just through images that they uh
they just need one word here or there. Sometimes
they even o on a single page, they occupy
it with an image and then one single vertical wor
word or something like that and it's enough. So
, you know, it, it is, it's
, it's amazing how uh the many different ways there
are for people to create great stories, I guess
there, there are and they're infinite, aren't they
? And, and it just sort of depends on
um on, on the way on the creators approach
and what their, what their own skills are.
No, you know, some are, it's amazing
when you read some books that are so dialogue heavy
and yet they don't feel that way because, you
know, reading just a bunch of dialogue can without
any descriptors, you know, without anything in between
that tells you where they are or, you know
, how a character, a little movement that a
character might have made that, that lets you know
what exactly they're trying to say. E even though
, you know, they might be talking about the
weather but really they're talking about something else underneath and
, and, you know, that just because of
, you know, a look, they give someone
, you, you know what? It's incredible to
be able to do that without that, you know
, without those, that those descriptors, you know
, and just to do it through dialogue. And
then on the other hand, you have other people
who will have almost no dialogue at all, which
can also be dreary and yet are able to communicate
a scene, a party, a cocktail party where
everybody is talking, you know, without hardly a
single word of dialogue and yet it's incredible, you
know, OK, so I'm going to give you
two different examples. So, uh first of all
, I'm uh a sucker for a good dialogue story
. I love, I love dialogue. I mean
, even in movies, one of the things,
one of the criteria that I use to classify a
movie as good is it has good dialogue. OK
. So for me, it's almost all of what
makes, makes me wanna throw rotten tomatoes. But
, but there's, there's a movie, I don't
know if you ever watch it, watched it.
Uh My dinner with Andre. Oh, yes.
Oh my God. Look, there's the visual aid
there for sure, because it's a movie. But
still, it's one of my favorite movies and it's
just, it's as simple as you can get.
It's like two guys, two guys having dinner and
, and, and having A&E long conversation about anything
and everything. And I really love that movie and
, and then on the others on the other side
, uh there's a Portuguese writer from the 19th century
called S Kos. And uh he's magnum opus or
at least the book that people consider his magnum opus
. It's even mandatory reading here in Portuguese schools is
uh the Mayas in English and Portuguese Mayas. But
anyway, and he, he is, he was
a realist writer. I mean, realism from the
19th century where many times some of those writers were
really heavy when it comes to description, I mean
, sin, description and describing places and all of
that. And I mean, I love the story
, but I have to be honest whenever it gets
to the descriptions, I have to skip them because
it's just too much. I mean, he describes
every single object in the room and I'm like,
oh, come on, man. Well, yeah
, you have to. II I feel at least
, yeah, I mean, I guess you don't
have to but um I, I feel like you
want to leave something to the imagination of the reader
for them to fill in you know, you want
to sketch it for sure. And you want to
give them a little color here and there. But
that makes it the reader's own too. That's how
, you know, readers feel a sense of um
investment in a look about to use their imaginations too
and about the descriptions. I don't know if you
agree with me on this or not, but the
descriptions I like the most are the ones where you
are describing relevant things to the story. So I
don't know, let's think about the concept of uh
Chekhov's gun. OK. So you're describing the gun
but the gun, the gun gets used but you
, but just describing all the chairs, the tables
are, these are that way and then it doesn't
matter at all to the plot because you're not going
to use the chair or the table or the call
or whatever, or the chandelier or whatever. I
, I mean, it's just too much for me
if you're describing things that do not. I,
I mean, I understand that descriptions might also not
be used useful for the plot itself. It's,
it's just describing a beautiful scenery or a beautiful house
or I, I understand that people might like that
, but for me, it's just uh I,
I don't know, it breaks the pace of the
story, you know, I don't like excessive description
and I, I think I've, I think I've
committed that sin as a writer by the way.
And um often I'll just speak for myself. It
, it, that, that needs to be taken
out, I think during the editorial process because I
think sometimes when you're writing a story and you're listening
and on that story, um you know, you're
, you're building the environment in your own mind.
If you haven't, if you're not the kind of
person who builds it excessively on the front end,
which I don't do. I, I feel like
I find that inhibiting and, and then you're always
at least I am not you. But then I'm
always checking to see what was it that I said
needs to be in that. Oh, well,
I guess I should write that in and that interrupts
my flow. Um But for sure. And then
, then what you're faced with sometimes most of the
time is that at least in some parts of your
story you've over described because you, you know,
you get into a room and you're like, well
, where, what is this room? And then
you, you know, you, you describe it
and sometimes you might even describe it really, really
well and you've got to make the decision then and
not be vain about it for heaven's sake and say
, OK, that's a great paragraph. But it's
got to go or it's got to be cut by
two thirds because who cares? You know what I
mean? It's inhibiting and it's, it's clunky.
It's, you know, you, you, you
, you not enhancing the experience of the reader and
look again again, people who like that kind of
thing perfectly, perfectly fine. I, I,
I'm not bothered by that at all, but hi
myself, I'm, I'm a character and plot guy
characters and plots are the, the, the two
most important things for me. I mean, you
can even be uh, extremely bad at describing places
and it doesn't matter much to me as long as
the, the characters are well developed and the plot
is interesting. II, I agree. I love
character driven stories. They're my favorite. I like
a good plot. You know, I've been,
I, I want there to be a plot,
um, with the characters but those are the two
most important things to me. And I think that
, you know, like some readers, you know
, the sort of, um, you know,
the, the Dan Brown stories, for instance,
those, those are great. They plot their plot
, plot, plot, plot, plot. Um
, it's, they're for people who love puzzles.
Yeah. And a lot of mysteries are that way
, you know? Exactly. Not exactly how they're
going to end. You may not know exactly who
did it but you, you know the procedure through
the story and it's, it's, it really is
like playing a game, um, a board game
or doing, uh, doing some kind of,
um, word puzzle, a crossword puzzle or whatnot
. And I, I like a little more than
that. It's kind of, you know, why
I like, uh, mystery writers. Like,
um, well, I feel like PD James does
a really great job that she, she creates a
world and it's not just a puzzle. Oh,
no. Look, II, I definitely think that
, I think that the crime stories are some of
the best ones out there to explore human psychology.
For sure, for sure. And that's why I
love to read. I like to explore human psychology
. I like to be the person sitting there,
you know, watching people go by. I like
watching my own behavior. Um And as you know
, and I like to be as detached about it
as possible and, you know, understand my own
motives in a, in a kind of clear eyed
way. And I like to do that with others
. It's um I, I just find that to
be really, really interesting and, but, but
the, the then Brown books look, I,
I know that perhaps I will be crucified by some
intellectual people. But I actually like Dan Brown.
I do. No, no, no, I
, I was, I, that wasn't a criticism
of Dan. No, no, no. I
think I'm saying it's a certain style of writing that
is, that's plot focused and hugely addictive because it's
a puzzle and it's primarily a puzzle. It's not
that um his characters aren't, aren't interesting, but
that's not the focus of the book. Um What
is it, the character in it is in Robert
Langdon? I think the professor really interesting concept for
a character, but the character doesn't get developed in
any massive, you know, or, or deep
way. It's about the puzzle. And, um
you know, uh but, but by the,
by the way, since, since you touch there
on character development, I also wanted to ask you
this. So because people, uh I, I
mean, at least the more critical kind of people
, they tend to uh talk a lot about uh
developing and liking a multi-layered characters that is characters that
are not just one dimensional and that are psychologically complex
. And I mean, uh but what does that
mean? Exactly? Because uh sometimes, so ju
just to, I, I mean, run through
a sort of abstract example, but sometimes people complain
about characters being one dimensional. But then uh on
the other hand, sometimes people also complain about characters
breaking character and, and sometimes it seems a bit
weird to me because not always, but some of
those times what people are referring to is, oh
, so this character did something in this particular situation
or uh behaved toward another character in a way that
doesn't uh doesn't go along with the kind of expectations
you have for him. But I, isn't it
a bit weird because we ourselves in our, let's
say real lives, we don't behave the same way
with everyone, right? I mean, I mean
, I, I mean, we, we have
, we behave differently depending on the person we,
we are interacting with and the kind of relationship we
have with them. Right. So, so what
I'm trying to say is, oh, I don't
know. Let's say that someone, um, I
know, let's say that you're talking about Tony Soprano
and he is a criminal and he's a very tough
guy or, I mean, apparently tough guy.
Uh, and, uh, uh, and then
, uh, suddenly he's a guy who can't really
hurt Children and animals and all of that. I
, I mean, people, perhaps, sometimes people
are expecting for a criminal to be a psychopath and
to be bad to everyone around him. But that
doesn't need to be the case necessarily. No,
they can be, um, they can act in
, you know, what can be viewed as a
psychopathic matter under very certain circumstances. I think,
um, terrorists are a great example who might themselves
have, you know, completely normal family lives if
you went home and have a wife and Children,
whatever it is. Um, and then under a
very particular circumstance they're capable of doing horrendous. Thanks
. Yeah. Um, but, but like with
war, you know, that's something that happens a
lot more common under, under really intense circumstances like
that. It's something that, you know, a
soldier has to contend with. It's something that someone
who is, you know, in an occupied land
or is, you know, an aggressor has to
contend with all of this, even if they think
that they have every right to be doing what they're
doing. But, but, you know, now
that I've described that to you, that sort of
, uh, I don't know, contradictory or conflicting
view that people have of characters where they expect them
to be one thing, but at the same time
, they want them to be multi layered. And
so, I mean, and now now that I
have described that to you, it came to my
mind that perhaps the way people react or think react
to or think about characters is the same way we
think about real people because we expect people to be
, let's say a good person or a bad person
every time toward everyone in every situation. But sometimes
people are just different people in different situations, they
behave differently to different kinds of people and sometimes people
are behaving unexpected ways as well. It's true,
human beings are predictable only for kind of it for
short spurts. You know, you might be able
to predict if you, you know what I'm saying
, you might be able to predict um the way
a conversation will go in the first few minutes because
you're exchanging pleasantries. Not always, but, you
know, sometimes the conversation starts off and it's,
you know, it starts off in a completely different
place than you never expected. But, you know
, you can pretty much predict when you run into
someone on the street that you haven't seen in a
while that, oh, nice to see you Ricardo
. How are you? I'm doing well. Can
you believe this weather? No, I can't.
Sure it is hot for this time of year.
You know, you can predict it until a certain
point and then you have no idea. If you
actually sit down with this person and you don't,
you know, go your separate ways, you have
no idea really where that conversation is going to go
. Um, but II, I, I think
when two things happen, when someone says, oh
, I, I didn't like that because that character
wouldn't do that. Um Either it's because the writer
failed. They did not, um, at least
at that point have the skill to help take you
on that character's journey and show you how the character
, um, you know, kind of build the
latter rungs between this behavior over here and then this
seemingly out of character behavior over here. Um It
could be because of the, uh, reader's expectation
that, hey, I wanted a happy ending.
I thought those two were gonna end up together,
you know what I mean or whatever, you know
, and, and their expectation kind of superseded,
maybe what was organic to the story in their own
mind, at least. And, um, so
they, they could not accept the story that the
writer actually wrote because they wanted. This is what
I wanted. I mean, you, I,
I think you and I have talked about um,
certain genres like the romance genre, for instance,
that um, a book is not a romance and
unless it has a happy ending then it's not a
romance that it's a love story. If it has
a, you know, a different ending other than
, and they lived happily ever after or they lived
happily ever after for now, you know what I
mean? Um, and so, uh, you
know, you, a writer has to be very
careful depending on the genre that they're writing in.
Because if you are writing a, a AAA piece
that is pretty strictly adhering to genre, you're setting
up very specific expectations for the reader. And if
you deny the reader what they're expecting, um you'll
be punished for it. Now, if the reader
is expecting something that's genre bending from the get go
, they'll usually go on that journey with you if
they like your writing, you know, assuming that
they actually like what you have to say and um
and they'll enjoy being taken on that journey and they'll
say, oh my gosh, can you believe that
this happened? Um And, but it, it
, it, it does a lot of, it
depends on expectation. And I, I think also
, I think a, a writer or creator has
to be careful not to um not to make a
character, do something or create a situation just for
the sake of creating it because they want to do
something different or because they want to make a,
a political point, you know, it's, or
or, or a personal point, you know,
it, it, that's kind of where the artistry
comes from is understanding what is outside of what you're
creating, what is organic to the story that you've
set up and you've perhaps, you know, written
the bones off. But the, the fact is
there's something else going on besides, um, besides
your, you know, your expectations, your original
expectations for the story. I mean, I can't
tell you how many times I started to write something
and then, and I've even had it, you
know, plotted out and everything. And then I
realize at some point in the story that something has
to change because I start to recognize and this can
be really painful by the way because it can undo
a lot of work you've already done or it can
just hurt because you, you're realizing that something really
painful has to happen in this story and, and
writing that is painful. You know, if you
have to kill a character for instance, that you've
become really attached to and you're realizing, oh my
God, this person can't survive this. I didn't
realize that when I was writing it. You know
, I thought this person was gonna survive. I
thought this person was gonna go on and, and
do you know the things that I had prescribed for
them? But I'm realizing right now that they're about
to get it in the neck. Yeah. No
. No. About the ex the expectations So several
ideas. So one of them is you really get
to have direct contact with how different expectations make people
love or hate stories. When there's an ongoing story
. And you go, for example, to online
forums and people are trying to uh trying to imagine
what we like happen next in the story. And
then there are people that say, oh the X
should happen. And then there are people that say
, why should happen. And there are people that
say, oh wherever, wherever uh let's see what
happens and then we'll see if it's good or not
. And when the uh for example, people who
got it right? Usually like the story, people
who got it wrong usually. Yeah. And then
the ones that were just open to see where things
would go. I mean, most of the time
, if they already like the story, they keep
liking it sometimes it's just, oh, this was
a bit silly. Uh And then also you mentioned
uh politics at a certain point there. And I
was thinking like, ee even politics, sometimes,
even if a book is heavily political, sometimes it
works. So it just, just think about Ayn
Rand's Atlas Rugged. I, I mean, for
me, that book is awful, but Libertarians,
they love the book. It's like, it's like
the best book ever. Conde's books are I think
, beautiful and they're, I think he was absolutely
robbed of the Nobel in literature, but they're highly
political. You know, um, I don't think
it's ever, I, I think that the,
the story is at the forefront and the story is
so compelling which is what makes it, um,
which is what makes it so good. You know
, even though he has a very clear political point
of view, I mean, it's kind of impossible
to miss but, and, and it's interesting because
what I, I read it's just the opposite.
Her politics are fascinating. You know what I mean
? And, you know, her characters aren't that
great. The story is interesting. I think the
plots are pretty interesting but the characters aren't that great
but her, but she is, she is such
a force. She is so interesting that, like
, like you said, particularly libertarians, particularly if
you are, um, you know, highly susceptible
to that point of view. It's riveting for you
the way, you know, happily ever after is
the only acceptable outcome for someone who is a true
lover of romance. Yeah. And, and the
same for the same for people on the left.
I don't know if, you know Berthold Brecht or
a writer from the, I think the late 19th
century. And, I mean, his book I
haven't read. Yeah, he, his books,
his books are like a cheesecake for leftists. It's
, it's just, it's just like bashing the powerful
uplifting the Van Dren. Yeah. But, and
I mean, the books are ob, uh,
objectively speaking, not that great, but for someone
who is just for someone who, who, you
know, wants to experience that. Right. Yeah
. And then uh just going back to the character
for a second. Uh Also there are particular kinds
of uh stories or fiction where a sort of one
dimensional characters work pretty well and work best. So
for example, Mr Bean, the, the comedy
series, I mean, I mean, Mr Bin
is the simplest character, you can create the,
the thing there is about creating funny situations. It's
not really about the character being extremely complex. It's
a very simple character, but it's a great comedy
series, right? No, it's true. And
that's, that's kind of WW well, you know
, that goes back to, to whatever the particular
strengths of the writer are because there are people who
are incredibly good at creating circumstances that force the characters
to react to the circumstances and then others do the
inverse where the creator or the creators, where the
characters influence the circumstances and all you wanna do is
is follow that character around and you know, watch
them influence their environment to watch other people react to
them, other characters react to them, watch how
an organization might change by the addition of this person
, you know, or um God, what is
it that there's a great um what is it called
? Oh God, I'm not going to bore you
with it then because if I can't recall it,
I'm not gonna sit here going now. What was
that. But the story was basically about um a
bureaucrat who likes things to be the absolute same all
the time. It's an old Thurber story, James
Thurber I believe, and a woman is hired into
this company to make changes as his boss. And
that is very bad for this guy. He does
not like change. And so he goes about orchestrating
her demise, you know, I mean, not
her literal demise but her demise in the company.
And it's just, it's just so funny. Oh
my God, the only story that I can think
of where those two things play together in this sort
of like Escher like way. You know, now
let me just say and you're probably going to laugh
at this. But uh when you describe the character
uh uh as being uh a guy who wanted for
uh things to be always the same way. It
, it, it this is for you to uh
to try to see, to have a glimpse at
how my mind works. What came to my mind
, someone who has, who likes to have control
over everything around them. And then the two stories
that came to my mind, Citizen Kane and 50
shades of Gray. I got two stories that can
possibly be more different, right? But this is
just for you to see how my mind works.
I think that's a good line. Oh my God
, this would probably make for a, a good
uh stand up plot. So I was thinking about
Citizen Kane and 50 shades of gray came to mind
. Yeah. Rosebud has everything to do with B
Ds M for sure. Yeah. Oh my God
. You know, the, the, I hope
I haven't mentioned this on one of our conversations because
I think we did talk about 50 shades of grey
at one point. But I, I thought the
most interesting thing about the 50 shades of grey phenomenon
came out of the prison system. Oh, really
? Yes. Um, I read this, this
was back when, like, this was back when
50 shades of grey was kind of first out and
it was first a huge phenomenon and everybody was reading
it. And, um, the, the article
that I was reading, the writer focused on the
fact that in men's prisons it was number one,
what men were reading in prisons and in women's prisons
, it, it didn't even crack the top 10
, maybe not even the top 20 which is sort
of the opposite of what was happening outside of prison
. Right. And as I was reading it,
I was thinking, well, that makes sense because
those women are in prison probably because they killed the
son of a bitch just like this guy. You
know what I mean? They're used to being treated
that way and they don't glamorize it, you know
, they're like, you know what, when I
look at Christian Gray, I think, Mark or
whatever, you know? And, but I just
thought that was so interesting that, um, that
, you know, women in prison weren't reading it
that they had, they, they weren't interested in
it. But, you know, the men were
definitely reading 50 shades of gray. But, but
, you know, may maybe the minority of prison
women or prisoners, female prisoners that were reading 50
shades of gray were the ones that those kinds of
people where they, uh, like to get angry
at the story. Oh, come on, I
will keep reading or watching this because this is making
me angry. It's true. And it's, it's
funny because there's this one, uh review that went
, you know, viral on goodreads of 50 shades
of gray. That was so funny. I mean
, it was like crying funny, laugh out loud
, funny. Um, and she was a hater
, you know, she, she and her brother
were reading it out loud to each other hating on
it. And, you know, haters can just
be so funny though sometimes. So it was just
, it was really, really good. Um,
you know, speaking of haters, I, when
we were talking about, um, stories that go
kind of that, that perhaps betray readers expectations or
defy readers' expectations, I was thinking about, um
, the Star Wars Universe and I'm, I don't
know if you're a Star Wars fan. I am
not well versed in this. I saw the first
three, you know, the ones that came out
in the seventies and I love them as a kid
, but I did not, I have not followed
the series since then, since then. But what
has been interesting to me is how angry Star Wars
fans are at Disney for how they, you know
, took, I apparently took the story sideways and
, um, did not, uh give readers what
they were or readers, readers watchers, um,
what they were hoping for. And it's also,
it's also funny because if you go on the internet
, sometimes there's ongoing wars between different fandoms and,
and then, and then people vote on what's the
most toxic phantom out. It's, it's like,
oh my God, the Harry Potter fans versus the
Lord of the Rings fans and the Star Wars fans
versus the, the Star Trek fans and the other
sci-fi universes. And then it's George RR Martin versus
Tolkien versus whoever. And it's, it's such,
it's a trail. Yeah. So, uh le
let me ask you another kind of question that I
think is it's something that even over this is our
6th, 5th or sixth conversation. I lost count
by knowledge. But all I know is that I
now like need glasses to see you clearly. Well
, not when I, when I'm, when I
sit back and I didn't when we first started.
How's that? Well, I also have some white
hairs on my beard now and five years ago.
Yeah. Well, they're a little blurry to me
so I don't see them I just see a nice
lush. Yeah, probably on camera. It's hard
to see them but I it, it's very easy
to notice them in, in person. Anyway.
Are there any things when you're writing a story that
you just think to yourself? Ok. So I
would never go there. There is for example,
describing the very tiniest details of a crime or I
don't know, exploring topics that you think are uh
too immoral to explore in a story or perhaps creating
characters that have specific idea is that you, that
you think are too immoral. I mean, do
, do you set any moral limits to what you
would explore in the story or not? Not that
I know of because I think that it's, it's
about, you know, how, how that is
done. I mean, I don't, I,
I can't imagine ever writing something that genuinely glorify something
grotesque and doing it in a way that is,
you know, obviously an endorsement, let's put it
that way. You know what I mean? Excuse
me, I, all allergies are upon me but
II, I can't think of anything that I absolutely
wouldn't address. I always thought that I couldn't address
a child being hurt, uh especially being a mother
. That's really difficult. I mean, it is
really, really difficult. It's, you know,
in the same way that it's, uh, it's
also hard for me like to watch an, you
know, a dog being hurt, you know,
an animal being hurt in that way, but I
did address it in a book and that kind of
surprised me and I, and I did it because
I realized that I'd set up the story in such
a way that I had to address it. I
couldn't leave it. I didn't get into, um
, I didn't, you know, I didn't make
a meal of it. Um, and not that
maybe that III I, I'm not saying that it
would be bad to do that in all circumstances,
but that's just not something that I wanted to do
at all. But I realized that I did have
to address it because, um, it was a
sit, it was a war situation and a child
was, excuse me, I'm sorry. And the
child was killed. And, um, and it
was in a, in a, a pretty awful
way and by a pretty awful person. But,
um, but I felt like I, I was
shirking a responsibility to the reader if I didn't address
that, um, the reader was invested in this
story, was invested in the child. And also
it was necessary for the development of another character,
for that to happen to them, you know,
and for, I, I had to create a
circumstance that was awful enough that it would propel the
story to where it needed to go if that makes
sense. Um, so, and I, not
for any moral reason, I don't think it's,
it's ne it's necessarily immoral to um, depict,
uh, you know, a, a child being
hurt or killed. I think that it de depends
entirely upon context. But I never thought that I
would write it because I thought it would just be
too difficult and it was very difficult to write for
me. I avoided it for days because I knew
I had to write that scene and I, you
know, oh, I'll do some admin today.
Well, I, I have to write, um
, um, I'll write an essay on Family Law
, you know, whatever it is. I,
I really, I avoided it in a pretty egregious
way for several days until I finally sat down and
said this is ridiculous. This has to get written
and I'm gonna do it and it was such a
relief to get it done. It's hard. I
mean, it's very hard to write certain, yeah
. Uh, to write about certain topics and scenes
. I mean, it, it is really hard
. Ok. So let, let me ask you
then another question related to that. Have you ever
read or watched something fictional? Of course, where
you fought? O ok. So the author,
the author here went too far. I mean,
this is just too graphic, too detailed, too
violent. Have you ever, ever, has anything
like that ever happened to you? No, not
in something I've read. But there is, this
a long time ago, there is a book that
I read, which was a sequel. It was
the sequel to, um, was the book Hannibal
, it was the sequel to Silence of The Lambs
. But the book version where I read it and
I thought, what the hell is this? Do
you know what I mean? Um So, you
know, it, I, I really felt like
I felt like the author had gone off the rails
and was writing like a weird fantasy of theirs and
not, what was this? Not the story that
he had originally written book, it's his story.
So, just by definition, I'm wrong, right
? But as, as a reader, I felt
like he did not, um, that I felt
like he'd gone off the rails and not in a
grotesque sort of way. Not like, oh,
I don't want to read that but, you know
what the hell kind of way. But no,
I've never read anything that I can remember that.
Um, that I couldn't get through. I think
often if you are absorbed enough in a story,
well, one of two things can happen. You
might love a character so much that you're like,
oh my God, I know they're gonna die and
I can't read that. You know, you,
you, you skip ahead a few pages, you
know what happened, you accept it but you just
, you just can't go there. I understand that
. But usually in what I'm reading, um,
when I'm absorbed enough in a story, I can
take it and I can understand why the author put
it there in the first place and why, um
why I have to be taken through that in order
to, you know, get to the other side
, you know, the other part of the story
kind of like what I described with what I felt
like I had when I had to put in,
you know, a difficult scene about a child being
killed. Um I, I put it there because
I really didn't see any other way for the story
to evolve, you know, to, to the
, for the story to get to the place that
it needed to be. And usually when I'm reading
something II, I feel that as well that doesn't
mean that there aren't parts of stories that I haven't
read where I've winced. I mean, really what
comes to mind that was so difficult to face was
, um, Styron Sophie's Choice. Mhm. I
don't know if you've read Sophie's Choice or if you've
seen the movie. No, I, that one
particularly, I don't think so. No. But
, ii, I mean, the story about a
woman named Sophie who, um, ends up in
, during World War Two in a concentration camp and
they make, she has two Children and they make
her choose which one is going to be killed.
Mm. Hence the title, I think they both
end up being killed. Um, but, you
know, they do, they both end up being
killed but they make her choose which is, you
can, I mean, for a mother that is
like, it is so horrific to imagine yourself in
that situation that you wanna look away because it's like
, and III, I don't, I don't even
know. I don't, I mean, it would
, it would be hard for me to imagine uh
, a woman being able to write it. Not
because she wouldn't have the skill, but it's,
you would almost need that the detachment of a man
to write that. Not that a man is detached
from his Children. That's not what I mean.
But it is just, I mean, I can
tell you as a, as a parent, it's
so like, mm, it's a whole body experience
. Um I can still like, II, I
can still physically conjure the um the, the feeling
that I would get when my child was hungry.
Yeah. And again, I mean, ii,
I certainly think a woman could write that. I'm
not saying that she couldn't. But uh uh I
mean, thyroid just did it so, so brilliantly
, you know, and that was fascinating and tragic
and horrifying and beautiful. OK. So let me
try to put it another way and then perhaps I
can give a few examples of mine. Are there
any stories in books, movies or any other kind
of medium that you've read, watched? And uh
after the fact you thought to yourself, OK.
So even if this is a great story because of
the way things are depicted, I don't feel uh
is recommending, recommending it to other people. Have
you ever had something like that or? I've,
I've, I'm not sure I put it quite that
way. Like, I mean, there's certainly stories
where I disagreed with the premise, maybe with their
historical premise or with a moral ambiguity that, um
, that, that the story, um, depicted
, you know, I definitely, but I would
never, I don't think there, that I would
ever go so far as to say, um,
well, don't read that because of it where I
wouldn't recommend it. I'd, I'd say, well
, it's interesting but here's what I think, you
know. Um I, so I guess I don't
, my answer is, I don't think so.
I can't, I can't conjure something, you know
, a memory of a time when I've, when
I've read something and said I'm so offended by this
. I think it shouldn't be or I would,
I would discourage people from reading it. I told
people when something really sucked, you know. Yeah
. But, but that's, that's a different,
that's a different kind of thing. But uh I
wasn't thinking perhaps uh so much as being offended,
but perhaps more as OK, so perhaps the guy
here, the creator went too far in terms of
the, the things graphically. And uh I mean
, I don't think I would feel well recommending the
II, I was able to go through it.
I still think it's a good story, but I
wouldn't feel well recommending this to anyone because even if
the story is good, I don't think that people
would be particularly enriched by being exposed to it.
Something like that. I, I can't, I
can't come up with an example of that. I
mean, if, if, if I felt that
I don't remember, I don't remember the story and
I think I would probably, if I felt so
strongly about something I don't think so. Have you
like, is there a story that you've read where
you're like, wow, he, he or she
should not have gone there? That was too much
? Ok. So I'm going to explain to you
what happened here over the course of my life basically
. So probably until 10 years ago, I was
one of those people that was like, ok,
so you should be exposed to great art of,
of any kind. And it doesn't matter if it
makes you feel unwell, if it makes you feel
a little bit sick, even if it's good art
, you should be exposed to it. But then
, um, for example, uh I watched the
anti-christ by Lars Von Drier. I don't know if
you ever watched that one. Uh And I was
like, I mean, it was very hard to
go through it, particularly the last 20 minutes or
something like that. But I went through it and
I, I mean, I've never had myself,
uh, I, I was never exposed to any
story where I was like, ok, so I
have to stop here. I can't go further.
I can't take it anymore. That, that never
happened to me personally. But then I tried to
show to watch it together with a couple of friends
from university back then. And one of them accidentally
accidentally skipped the movie to one of the most violent
scenes. And they were like, man, I
, I can, I can, I can,
I can't watch it. Sorry. Uh Look,
this is just too much and then the same thing
happened, uh when I tried to show, for
example, my mother, a couple of movies that
for this or that reason, she uh uh she
doesn't like the uh I mean, to see certain
kinds of things. And then, I mean,
uh over time I got to a point where I
sort of became more sensitive to the idea that perhaps
there are certain kinds of graphic things, perhaps not
so much in books, but in movies because you
actually see the stuff that that's happening there where I
, I mean, I, there are certain things
that I really hesitate to recommend to other people because
one thing that I think about now that I didn't
consider before 10 years ago or so is OK,
so this is a good story but is it really
worth it for someone to be exposed to it?
I mean, if someone is not and never watches
this, uh are they, would they be missing
on something, you know, and and, and
now I, and now I think like that and
there, and for example, the anti-christ is one
of those movies. Uh The adaptation of 120 Days
of Sodom by Pierre Paolo Paolini is another one of
those movies because of the sexual perversion and all of
that. Uh and there are, there are perhaps
a couple more, I mean, it, the
list is still very small, at least the ones
, the ones that immediately come to mind. But
now I have, uh, uh, at least
a small list of things that look and unless people
ask me directly about them, I basically never mention
them to anyone who is not at least familiar with
the existence of that movie. For example. II
, I hear what you're saying. I, um
, I think probably in my case, um,
I, I tend to kind of do a pre
emptive strike and I, I will avoid something that
is that I just know I don't wanna see.
Um, I mean, a good example is,
and I'm not, I'm really not that big a
horror fan but II, I think my son probably
would have watched this with, would have enjoyed watching
it with me. There's a series called Saw.
Yeah. Yeah. And it's that I've, I've
watched, I've watched the movie. I know that's
not for me. I've never seen a single one
of them so I'm not gonna judge but I know
that's not for me. But what's really interesting to
me is, for instance, you know, I'm
the movie The Exorcist. I mean, granted I
grew up Catholic, I went to Catholic schools,
you know, but the movie The Exorcist was so
terrifying to me when I was a kid that I
had nightmares about it into adulthood. I mean,
well into adulthood and my, you know, 16
year old daughter who I think first saw the original
Exorcist, um, when she was a really little
kid, all three of my kids have seen it
. They think it's hilarious. I mean, hilarious
. And they, they think that part where she
throws up the pea soup is one of the funniest
things they've ever seen. They think the special effects
are terrible. I mean, the, that movie
does not give them nightmares but a little bit.
But wait a minute if they watched the scary movies
before watching The Exorcist because if they did, because
if they did it's easier to understand why they would
laugh because Scary Movie two is all about right with
James Woods and, yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
I've seen that. Exactly. Um, maybe,
but I think also they genuinely think it's a funny
movie. I mean, I think they genuinely think
it's kind of like, like when her head spins
around, you know, that was, that was
so disturbing to me as a kid to watch that
. It was absolutely horrific and to them they're like
, that is so obviously not real, you know
, what I mean? And they just think it's
funny and, um, uh, so it,
it, it, I'm, I'm always intrigued by
people who are really into horror in this way and
they don't mind watching people get hacked to death and
they are completely able to separate, um, what
they're watching with real life, you know, and
be like mom, it's not real, don't you
get it? It's not real. And whereas to
me I'm watching it and I'm like, I know
it's not real but it feels real. You know
, I can see it and then I'm imagining this
in my own life, but not everybody feels that
way and they're, they're able to make that separation
. I'm not one of those people. I,
uh, you know, it's why I'm not,
I mean, I love a great horror movie.
I mean, I think we've talked about this,
that the novel Dracula is one of my favorite novels
of all time. I think it's so good.
Well, I think the character is so good.
Um, but I, I, you know,
I could not be one of those people who loves
horror and can watch saw and, you know,
uh, the conjuring and something, you know,
some other horrific thing back to back or like those
simulated snuff movies that I think that is really horrific
. To me, the idea, even if it's
, if it's acted out on film and it's not
real. And the idea of Snuff is, that's
probably where I would just wanna throw up. Yeah
, that makes sense. Now, look, uh
, horror, horror movies. Uh, it,
it, it might be weird but, uh,
even when it comes to the list of movies that
I don't recommend to anyone, not one of them
, apart from perhaps the anti-christ, I'm not sure
if it's classified as a horror movie or not.
But apart from that one, there's not one single
horror movie there. So horror movies, I,
I don't say that I'm a horror movie fan.
I've watched a ton of them just because until,
until a few years ago I was addicted to movies
. And so I've watched everything out there, even
the 19 eighties slasher movies, I've watched all of
them and most of them do not bother me at
all. Some of them make me feel a little
bit uneasy but not sick nor anything like that.
So, but, but I, I'm not,
I wouldn't say I'm a horror movie fan but,
uh, I, I mean, I guess that
the things that perhaps when it comes to recommending them
to other people bother me the most. It's when
it, it involves things that can actually happen realistically
in real life, you know, like, like
for example, what happens in the anti-christ that could
happen in real life, the sexual perversions in 120
days of sodom and uh uh uh uh oh,
have you watched here Irreversible By Gaspar Noe with Monica
Bellucci uh yeah, so that movie involves uh a
, a very hard to go through rapes in,
I mean, that would be, that would be
difficult. I mean, I, I would never
go so far as to say, you know,
that, that it shouldn't be a movie or anything
like that, but there are definitely things that I
would avoid because to me they don't have value and
, and for example, just a few minutes ago
I mentioned Tony. So I know and in the
Sopranos, there's also a rape scene. I don't
know if you remember this. But there's one episode
where his female therapist is uh leaving her office and
she's raped by a guy. I can't remember exactly
who the guy was. And I think that Tony
Soprano eventually gets across that and kills the guy.
Iii I can't remember. I can't remember exactly.
But uh I mean, uh that 10 of course
, it's always hard to watch those kinds of scenes
. Always, at least for me personally, it's
always because I, I feel my blood boiling because
I get really angry just imagining something like that happening
in front of me. And it really messes me
up at least for a few minutes. But that
one actually, I don't have any problem recommending the
entire Sopranos series to anyone even with that scene and
with other stuff, I don't have any problem at
all, but irreversible. I think that they just
went too far there. I mean, even I
, myself, I watched the movie once and I
can't watch the movie again ever again. So I
think probably for me what is, what would be
, uh, a line crosser is if a movie
was too nihilistic, um, and cease to have
any moral dimension because I think, I think our
lives have a moral dimension, you know, and
, and I, it's also just deeply disturbing to
watch something like that and be able to, um
, uh, be able to take any value from
that and apply it to my own life, which
I think is why I read and it's why I
write. It's why I watch movies. I mean
, ultimately it's why I consume art. It's to
be, um, enriched in some way. And
if I don't find it enriching, it's funny you
should mention The Sopranos because I too would recommend that
series to anyone. But I remember when I stopped
watching it, um, and I, I may
have been pregnant at the time. It's kind of
funny because when I'm, when, whenever I was
, I was pregnant, there were certain things I
could not watch and I could not, I mean
, I just couldn't, I mean, I,
I remember in one of my pregnancies kill Bill came
out, by the way, I love Kill Bill
. I watch it now. You know what I
mean? I couldn't watch it. I mean,
I couldn't, and, um, I remember an
episode of The Sopranos and I I have not from
that episode on, I, I never finished the
series. It was a young woman who was a
stripper at one of Tony's clubs and she was pregnant
with this awful guy's kid and he beat her to
death. Do you remember the scene? That was
so disturbing to me that, and I knew that
that guy was eventually gonna get it. You know
, there, there was a moral dimension to the
Sopranos actually. You know, but I, I'm
pretty sure I was pregnant when I watched that.
Um, because I, I just couldn't, you
know, I just couldn't go beyond that. Um
, and not in a judgmental way. I,
I just couldn't watch it because it, you know
, it was so, uh, it was disturbing
to me on, on such a deep level.
Ok. So, II I made me physically ill
. I mean, I remember it made me physically
ill. Yeah. OK. So perhaps, uh
, 01 of the things that bother me when it
comes to how certain things are sometimes depicted is if
you really need to do it that way or go
that far because for example, in the Sopranos,
the rape scene, you see some of it,
but most of it is suggested, you know,
in irreversible, it's not suggested at all. I
don't think it's all there. And one thing that
bothers me about that, it's not just the morality
of it, but I, I, in,
I wonder whether it's telling me that perhaps the author
, the director, the writer, whoever is not
that great at directing or writing because for, for
me, someone who's really good at, uh for
example, making, making someone feeling disgusted at the
rape scene does not have to show it all the
, I agree. I, I, and I
, and I, and I think the level of
disgust and I think it, and I think someone
is a better writer if, uh for example,
when it comes to books or, I mean,
there's that idea of you show don't tell, right
show don't tell. In the case of movies,
I would say because it's all showing uh you show
but not too much. Are you sure? But
you're not uh describe, I mean, in,
in that case, it's not describing but it's showing
uh everything down, down to the details. Uh
I agree with that and I, and I,
and I think that perhaps there are times that's just
too much, it's not needed. It's, it's
just that's not needed to convey the same kind of
, or, or to create the same kind of
reaction in viewers or readers. I would agree with
that. I mean, it's funny, I was
talking about this with, um, with a writer
friend. Uh This is some time ago but when
uh I sat down to write um this historical fantasy
series, uh breath some years ago when I started
it, um you know, it has a,
a, a central love story to it. And
at, you know, at the time, and
I think this is largely still the case, really
kind of explicit love scenes had made their way into
just about every genre historical fiction. And, you
know, it, it had, you know,
left the confines of erotica and it was in science
fiction, it was in historical fiction, it was
in, in pretty much every kind of fiction.
And I decided that I was not gonna do that
. I decided that I was gonna have a very
sensual love story and have it be, um,
you know, hopefully very emotional and very compelling,
but that I, that I was gonna have a
fade to black approach. And I'm glad I did
that because I'm, I'm for one, I'm really
sick of being bombarded by explicit love scenes at this
point. I feel like, um they're just there
because I don't know, maybe the writer feels like
they need to put it in there to attract the
reader's attention. Um And that we just keep having
to up the ante with these scenes and with these
stories because it's now it's just not enough to have
, you know, a passionate kiss or even like
, or, or even, you know, regular
sort of um sex that doesn't involve all sorts of
tricks. And after a certain point, it's like
, really, I, I mean, it,
it's sort of like when, you know, that
the James Bond franchise has to scale back, you
know, like with the Roger Moore ones when they
started going to space and all this stuff, it's
like, no. Yeah. And they've kind of
got to bring it back to a place where look
, ok, now he's just using his fists and
his gun. He's not gonna be in space.
He's not gonna be doing anything, you know,
we're not going to be going to the paranormal.
We're not gonna make him do things that, that
don't in any way seem realistic for this, you
know, and now 56 year old man for God's
sake with bad knees probably. Um So I,
you know, that's, that's something that I,
that, that I've come to feel strongly about.
I think that um I think that the depiction of
sex has just gotten ridiculous, but in a lot
of, a lot of stories and not because I'm
prudish about it. It's, I'm not, it's
just I'm bored by it, you know, and
, and I feel like we're constantly having to add
more whipped cream and more cherries and more chocolate sauce
and more peanut sprinkles and then the colorful confetti sprinkles
. Yeah. No, but, but, but
you know what, when it comes to uh love
scenes, sex scenes, whatever, I mean,
I don't have a particular problem uh in the way
they are graphically depicted in more or less detail.
I mean, perhaps sometimes I would say, OK
, so this is perhaps uh no longer just a
romance novel, this is perhaps already pornography or something
like that. But if people are into pornography fine
, I mean, I don't, I don't,
I don't have a moral problem with it in that
regard. I don't have, I'm not prudish about
it. But the, the thing, for example
, about irreversible and 120 days of sodom is that
, I mean, in 120 days of sodom,
I mean, it involves things that I wouldn't even
mention here because this will also be on youtube.
And it's just too much just to say that it's
too much, even for people that watch regular porn
, it's just too much because it goes beyond gratuitous
. Yeah. And the, and then, and
then adding, yeah, and then adding the ribs
in an irreversible, I mean, sometimes I find
myself asking, I mean, isn't this wrong?
I mean, and by wrong, I'm not sure
if I mean, morally wrong or artistically wrong either
because perhaps you shouldn't expose people to so much graphic
stuff because it, it feels sort of wrong or
because as an artist, you don't need to go
that far. And so perhaps you're not as great
an artist as you think you are or as you
could be. And, and, and another thing
that comes to mind and that when I really straight
out say that it's morally or was morally wrong,
for example, back in 20 I want to say
2015, possibly 2016, there was an, an
art exposition in Germany or the Netherlands. I mean
, I, I might be getting the date and
the place wrong, but it was in definitely in
Europe and definitely in the mid 2010. So uh
uh someone uh put uh a dog in an art
exposition. He was, he was tied to the
by a rope, I think to, to the
wall and then uh uh in front of him.
But uh Alpa is rich. They put their uh
a plate with food and the dog couldn't reach the
food. And I would, that would, that
would infuriate me and the, and the, and
the dog dive of starvation in an art exposition.
And when, when I, and, and,
and, and I, I mean, I didn't
see that directly. Fortunately, but when I got
across that news, I was like, man,
whoever did this? I don't, I don't care
about abstract. I don't care about abstract well sounding
artistic liberty. That's just play cruelty, cruelty.
I mean, you don't do and I, I
, you're right. You don't do that to a
living being full stop it. I just stands there
. I don't care about artistic liberty and those well
sounding abstract words, I don't care about that.
I've never heard of that. And I'm, that's
disgusting. I just don't even, I don't even
understand. I don't think that's an artist. I
think that's a sadist who is pretending to be an
artist. I think that that's a very disturbed person
because artists, artists understand the difference between their work
and you know what I mean? They understand that
it's pretend and that they're, they're, they're reflecting
parts of the world around them and parts of their
imagination. Um, but that's, that doesn't make
any sense to me. I think that that artist
was a sadist who was masquerading as an artist.
I don't think that's, I don't, I,
I don't even, I, I can't even wrap
my head around. I know, look, there
, there are, there are troubling stuff in artistic
creation but that one II, I mean, that
, that, that, that went beyond all limits
for me. That, that was just probably the
worst thing I ever heard an artist doing. Uh
Yes, I agree. I think, um I
can't think of anything in specific but I think that
there, that there have been times when I've been
reading something and I have felt uncomfortable because I feel
like the artist is either describing something that they've done
or want to do that is abhorrent. And I
can't say what makes me think that they're not just
that it's not just in service of the story.
I, I'm not really sure what it is specifically
that made me feel that except that it's, it
, it's similar to when you just get a bad
feeling about a person that you meet and you just
think, I don't, I don't like that person
. There's something about them and, you know,
we just had a very, you know, perfunctory
conversation. It's, there's nothing that I can point
to specifically, but I don't have a uh I
don't have a positive feeling about this person. And
, you know, I, I mentioned that example
, that example specifically because in that example, there's
no doubt that the guy who did that is an
awful but, but, but I mentioned something,
there's something very sick. Yeah. But, but
that's the point I wanted to get at because sometimes
I find myself suspecting if there are particular kinds of
creators, artists that, uh, include certain things
in their stories because they, uh, uh,
not because they just want to artistically explore this or
that, or create some sort of emotional reaction but
because they are actually sick in their heads, I
think, yes, I think for sure in the
same way that I think that there are, you
know, people go into certain professions that are honorable
professions but they go into those professions because it allows
them under, you know, the guise of,
of either, um, you know, working with
Children or being in law enforcement to act out certain
fantasies of theirs that are not so healthy. You
know, I, I, that's something that we
always have to be careful of when, um,
you know, allowing people to be a, in
situations where others are vulnerable. Mhm. Yeah.
A and look, just to be clear, I'm
not saying at all at all that, all artists
are the mature, all artists are, are bad
people. I mean, one thing that at least
I learned in life and uh I haven't seen any
evidence that goes against it is that most people are
decent people. And that means that sometimes they make
mistakes, sometimes they do bad, bad things that
, but most of the time they're just going on
with their normal lives, they work, they have
their families, they do their things they try to
do as well as they can find. And then
there are a tiny minority of exceptionally good people and
then they are, there are also a t mi
uh, there's also a tiny minority of monsters and
, and, and, and, and, and
, and that's also the tiny minority of artists po
possibly that I am referring to here. So it's
just that, that I'm saying, I think you're
quite right and I, to me the evidence for
, for the fact that most people are, are
basically good under most circumstances, you know, particularly
if they're well socialized and if they're living within a
, a healthy enough society with uh, appropriate rules
and appropriate, um, punishments and, and,
and, um, incentives. But if, if
that weren't the case, we'd all be in pretty
big trouble, you know, every time we left
our house, you know, it would be like
, like the movie the purge, right that my
kids have seen. Um, so I, I
think you're absolutely right. I think though too,
that, that tiny minority can cause a lot of
trouble, the tiny minority of monsters. I mean
, we can see that on social media first.
I mean, I think that there are a lot
of bots on social media. Um, and,
well, that's, I guess an example of that
because here's somebody who's got a bot farm who has
, well, the worst intentions and are, you
know, dive bombing people's posts and saying absolutely horrible
things, anything from just, you know, things
that are uh abhorrent, just morally abhorrent to um
racist or, you know, whatever it is just
to, to kind of create the illusion that there
are more people who feel that way than, than
there really are. So that maybe they can feel
less alone in their depravity. I think that that
is, you know, part of the way that
, um you know, a, a platform like
, like Twitter. Um but it's not just Twitter
. I mean, I don't mean to pick on
Twitter because I actually, I like Twitter. I
use Twitter, I use a lot of social media
platforms and I think that they can be a force
for a lot of good, but they can also
be this weird sort of fun house mirror. It's
funny, I saw this interesting, I, I
passed this interesting post the other day and I wish
I had saved it, but I think I can
recall it but they uh the, the post basically
described how certain social media platforms, um kind of
cater to a certain one of the seven deadly sins
. You know, Instagram is vanity. Uh I
, I saw that Twitter is wrath, right?
Um, but I, I, you know,
Linkedin is Facebook is envy but I tt is L
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. I, I thought
that was really smart because, um, you know
, at their, at their worst and this is
, this is what's so hard. I was talking
to another friend of mine. She had, you
know, been, she had built out a lot
of um the Amazon's advertising console, you know,
system. Um you know, she, she worked
in that and as a result she uh you know
, had, had been to conferences and such where
there were people who were dealing with um you know
, they were iii I wouldn't say they were content
moderators but they had some sort of function within these
uh social media companies that, that had to,
you know, monitor bots and all of this.
And she was saying how just like God, I
, I would not want that job for anything else
in the world because it's so hard and you can't
even imagine all the crazy stuff that is happening.
And um you know, the bot farms and the
, you know, people who are, who are
purposely, people and entities who are, you know
, purposely trying to um mhm you know, change
a narrative or, or make us see ourselves or
see the world in, in this sort of fun
house mirror way and, and how do you manage
that? How do you, um, how do
you get rid of the bots while still allowing people
to speak and allowing that free flow of ideas to
continue? It's very hard. Yep. Yeah.
But, but I mean, I just brought this
uh, discussion to the table about perhaps the morality
or immorality of certain, um, art pieces or
certain artists and, and perhaps uh possible the ontology
for artists or something like that because uh I mean
, I, I don't know, e even I
myself do not have any definitive answers to these questions
. And uh and I, and I myself am
not so sure even when it comes to that list
, I've mentioned of films, I don't recommend to
anyone if I should really not recommend them or I'm
still sort of thinking about it. And that's why
sometimes I bring that to the table when talking with
certain people to see if I can uh figure out
my own thought process. But uh I mean,
it's just questions that I think are worth uh exploring
because there are perhaps certain things that perhaps we give
artists too much leeway. Uh And, and because
they are artists, perhaps there are too many things
that we excuse and perhaps some of them we shouldn't
. I'm not sure. Yeah, I'm not sure
. II I tend to think that when someone goes
too far as the artist with the dog did that
, the way that we tend to um counter that
is with a society healthy enough to condemn it and
not reward it. And that's, I think something
that we really need to be careful about in terms
of um you know, how, how we structure
our lives, how we structure our cultures and our
societies and understanding um when bad behaviors cannot be tolerated
and must be, um, must be not just
openly discouraged but really deterred in, in a way
that, that benefits the whole, right? But
not in a way that, um, iii,
I guess causes of, of this feels unfair and
causes a reaction, you know, a, a
counter reaction. But it's, it's, it's hard
. I mean, I, I am not a
moral relativist, you know, and I think that
the moral relativism that has kind of gripped, um
, that, that's, that we're in the grips
of, and that we have been in the grips
of for a few decades is not healthy. I
think that we have an obligation to ourselves and to
society at large and certainly to the most vulnerable to
make a decision as to what is morally acceptable behavior
and what isn't. Yeah. And, and you
know, and if we don't, we put,
we put people in danger, usually people who are
most vulnerable people who are poor people who are,
you know, Children who, you know, cannot
care for themselves and make decisions for themselves and that
, um, we have to have the strength to
stand up for, you know, what, what's
, what is the best thing to do even if
, uh, it can be harsh sometimes. Yeah
. No, I know. And, you know
, another thing that I find interesting here, at
least for me is that, um, I tend
to fall much more on the liberal side of the
aisle when it comes to politics, economics and all
of that. But when it comes to this particular
artistic, moral questions curiously enough, I, I
guess that all of the things I brought to the
table here would be the things that you usually associate
with conservatives as them, for example, saying that
, oh, you shouldn't pick that kind of thing
in art and where, uh, I mean,
that, that sort of thing. But yeah,
it, it is what it is so. Well
, we need both. I mean, really we
need, um, without conservatives, uh, people
who are more liberal and progressive would take us off
a cliff and without liberals and progressives, conservatives wouldn't
allow our society to grow because too cautious, we
need both to work together. And I, I
don't, I don't, I don't think it would
be healthy to be, um, someone who only
has a progressive mindset or only has a conservative mindset
. I think that, um, you know,
part of the culture war that we're having is the
result of these two extremes which often sound very similar
to one another. Um, having arguments over the
vast majority of people who tend to pick and choose
their, um, their, their, well,
their viewpoints, I guess a little, a little
more, um, bipartisanly, let's put it that
way. You know what I mean? And you
can be a very liberal person and yet think,
ok, I think that there are moral limits to
what, uh, say a performance artist like the
artist you mentioned should be able to do that.
No one should be able to come to harm or
no creature. Um No sentient creature like a dog
, you should be able to come to harm because
in the name of quote art, right? I
don't, I think that that is reasonable to have
that point of view and um just as it's reasonable
to be, you know, a conservative person and
, and say, I, I just, you
know, don't, don't have a problem with uh
finding a compromise on even an incredibly contentious uh societal
issue like, um like abortion or, or marriage
rights or what, whatever it is that that might
be there, you know, and I think most
people are willing to make compromises in between and most
people understand that there are pros and cons to,
to most issues and that we have to weigh those
as, as, as a society. And if
we're, if we're not weighing them and we're only
kind of marching lockstep with um whatever side we believe
ourselves to be on that, that doesn't really feel
like progress either. And that doesn't feel like,
um, like it will lead to a, a
graceful and functioning society. Well, actually, now
that I think about it and um referring to the
, that example with the dog, I think,
I, I don't know exactly when that started.
But uh uh uh uh don't you see now when
many times in movies before the movie starts, uh
, when they evolve animals a message there, something
like no animals were, were hurt in the filming
of this movie or something like that. So at
least that's something that, uh, people care more
about and think that it goes beyond, uh,
artistic expression, I guess. Yeah, I think
, I think most people are, are horrified by
that. I mean, really, I mean,
isn't that, that the, the one of the
signs of, of a future serial killer, someone
who tortures animals as a kid? You know,
I think that that is a pretty serious taboo.
Um, and rightly so, uh, of,
you know, for one's own gratification to be hurting
another being, you know, that's, that's something
that even, you know, even with like,
talking about 50 shades of gray that there's a reason
why in those, in, in those, um
, communities there are all sorts of strictures that are
put into place so that, um, you never
go too far because of how dangerous it is.
Um, when we do go too far. Yeah
, it is dangerous. You know, I think
that. Yeah, hi guys. Thank you for
watching this interview. Until the end. If you
like what I'm doing, please consider supporting the show
on Patreon and paypal. The links are in the
description down below and also please share like and hit
the subscription button. The show is brought to you
by N Lights learning and development. Then differently check
their website at N lights.com. I would also like
to give a thank you to my main patrons and
papal supporters per Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Sun
Bernard Seche Olaf, Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whittenberg,
Arno of Tim Hollowing, Eric Aleni John Connors Philip
for Connolly. Then the Metro Robert Winde INAs Yu
Mar Nevs Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus Phil, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Fergal cousin Hall
, her Rag Michel, Jonathan lebron Jars and Ka
. Eric Heinz. Mi Smith J We Hummel sad
friends. David Sloan Wilson Yasi de Ro NP,
please. Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt Pablo Stassi Alek
Bach Ma he s of Zal Adrian Yi Paulin John
Bar, poso Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Bruner
Douglas Fry Franco Beto Lotti Gabriel Cortez, Orli Scott
Zachary FTD and Smith John Wilman, Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Lo the Chris
Williams and Peter Walla and David Williams the Costa Anton
Erickson Charles M Alex Show. Marie Martinez, Coral
Chevalier, Bangalore, Larry Dey Junior, Old Herring
Starry Michael Bay. Then spur by Robert Grassy.
Zor and Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Rads,
Mark Kempel Thomas Dubner and Luke Ni and re story
Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Nowicki Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man. George Cort is
Valentin Steinman, Paul Crawleys Kate V Goer, Alexander
Hubbard, Liam Dunn B. Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
Jonas Herner. Slow. Good enough, Gregory Hastings
and David Pins of a special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Lucas to Tom Ween
, Bernard Nic Ortiz Dixon Benedict Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin Jarl Montenegro, Al Nick Ortiz
Nick Golden and Rosie and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergei Adrian and Bogdan K Yvette.
Thank you for all.